---
layout: post
title : Teaching
categories: Pages
permalink: /teaching
---

## Courses

###Physics for Elementary Teachers
An introductory course built around a student-oriented pedagogy where almost all the course concepts are developed through direct experimentation in groups.  It focuses on building a conceptual understanding of energy and forces and using those concepts as a framework for understanding gravity, magnetism, electricity, and light.   The course becomes particularly relevant for elemetary teachers through "Learning about Learning" activities where we observe and discuss the learning processes of elementary students.

###Physics Foundations
An overview of physics in one semester, covering a broad range of topics, from Newtonian mechanics to relativity and particles.  We use algebra to develop a quantitative understanding of the topics and laboratory activities to explore a few of them in greater depth.

<!--- more --->

###How to Facilitate Cooperative Group Learning?

<div class="imgcontainer" style="float: none; margin: 0px auto; width=100%; border: none;">
<iframe style="width: 420px; height: 315px; padding: 0px; border: 0px;" scrolling="no" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/D5DnqgNFmXc" frameborder="0"></iframe>
<p>video developed for my CGL training workshop</p>
</div>

The physics education literature has repeatedly demonstrated the
effectiveness of active leaning techniques over traditional
lecture-based teaching. One active learning strategy currently gaining
popularity at the University of Wisconsin is the use of cooperative
group work in discussion sections. To encourage adoption and increase
effectiveness, however, teaching assistants must have some training to
understand the benefits of group work and to develop a sense of how
best to design activities to capitalize on the social aspects of group
work.

In response to this need, we have developed a workshop for TAs on
cooperative groups.  In the workshop, we establish the benefits of
active learning techniques through a review of literature and
introductory exercises that expose the participants' own abilities to
learn without understanding.  We then address several practical and
social obstacles to leading a successful group work session through a
video presentation and role-playing activity where participants must
resolve simulated problems in the group-based classroom.  Throughout,
we rely on small group discussions among the participants to model the
approach we are presenting and to capitalize on the diversity of
experience that the participants bring to the workshop.

###Workshop Materials
Watch the video ["Cooperative Group Work in the Field" on YouTube](http://youtube.com/watch?v=YnHl2rjloqo) (embedded above).

###Resources
[Videos from the University of Colorado Science Education Initiative](http://stemvideos.colorado.edu/)
